---
title: "Modifying memory of a running process in Linux"
date: 2019-06-21
permalink: /posts/2019/06/blog-post-14/modifying-memory-of-a-running-process
redirect_from: /posts/2019/06/blog-post-14/
tags:
  - linux
  - memory
  - c
  - process
---

Everything said in this post is based on my half-understanding of how memory works,
especially in Linux. There are certainly going to be parts in this post that are misunderstood
by me. Don't rely on this post for your homework and take everything in this post with a
grain of salt. However, I hope to continue to refine the content in this post as I understand
more about how a computer works. Consider this as a disclaimer. That said, let's begin!

I've been trying out 6502 and x86 Assembly to learn some basic reverse engineering and also
to learn think in these low-level programming languages, hopefully to understand more of how
everything works under-the-hood. So I thought what better than to pun some other process's
memory. I figured I'll try to modify some stuff assigned to memory by one process from some second
process. I know Windows has tools like [Cheat Engine]() while Linux has [scanmem]().
I still wanted to create my own tiny little program which would be enough to demonstrate how
these big tools worked at their heart.

Most modern Operating Systems have [ASLR (Address Space Layout Randomization)]() turned on
by default which can help prevent many [buffer overflow]() and code injection attacks. These
attacks if successful could possibly allow the user to gain access to sensitive information
not intended for access to the end user. Although, I've tried Cheat Engine and to my knowledge
popular debuggers still allow for a way to access and modify the disassembled code of a binary
when loaded into memory. They also have a way to watch for code whenever a specified memory
location is accessed by the concerned process, so I'm not completely sure whether these
debuggers somehow workaround ASLR or if this completely unrelated. Irrespective of this, to
make things not more complicated, we'll already know the address of the memory location we wish
to modify, as you'll see later.

From now on, let's refer to a primary innocent process as Process A and the secondary process
which attempts to hack into the memory of Process A as Process B. In Linux, we have a system call
[ptrace]() which acts as a middle man between Process B and the memory of Process A. One cannot
directly read or write to the memory of another independent process without ptrace for some
reason I don't understand. My current guess is that it's there so that a process doesn't
unintentionally messes up with the memory of some other process. So, if you see someone with ptrace
it's probably because they ought to either save the world from extinction or be the cause
itself. Similar in Windows you have [ReadProcessMemory]() and [WriteProcessMemory]()
functions available in Windows API acting as the middle man.

Let's say we have this simple C code:
```c
// process_a.c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <unistd.h>

int main() {
    int n = 10;

    printf("%d\n", n);
    printf("%p\n", &n);

    sleep(25);
    printf("%d\n", n);
    printf("%p\n", &n);
    return 0;
}
```

All it does is:
  - assign a variable a value
  - display the variable's value and its location in memory
  - sleep the main thread for a while
  - display the variable's value and its location in memory again


Let's run it:
```console
$ gcc process_a.c -o process_a && ./process_a
10
0x7fffcfd52924
10
0x7fffcfd52924
```

This is our Process A. Our goal is to have a Process B change the value of the assigned variable to
something like `20` while the main thread is sleeping. If we succeed, it should show us the value `20`
after waking up from sleep while the memory location should remain the same.

I've only tried this on Linux so that's what I'll be talking about. As I mentioned earlier,
you need to fire the ptrace system call and you can do that natively via C. So, what we'll
do is write another program which will act as Process B. To overwrite the memory of another process
in Linux, you need to know three things - the PID of the Process A, the memory location to be
modified, and obviously the data you need to overwrite with. It's easy to know the PID of a process
in Linux, and can know the memory location of the variable since our Process A prints the variable's
memory location itself. The data can be anything, we are going to replace it with `20`.

Here's how we'll use `ptrace`:
```
// process_b.c
#include <sys/ptrace.h>
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    int pid = 5831;
    int *address = (int *)0x7fffcfd52924;
    int data = 20;

    ptrace(PTRACE_ATTACH, pid, NULL, NULL);
    perror("attach");
    ptrace(PTRACE_POKEDATA, pid, address, data);
    perror("pokedata");
    ptrace(PTRACE_DETACH, pid, NULL, NULL);
    perror("detach");

    return 0;
}
```

Another thing to take care is that the PID and the memory of any process A are allotted at execution.
As far as I know, one cannot predict the PID and where in memory a process will go live before execution.
There are probably ways to automate this after the concerned process is executed but we'll avoid
complicating the code.

Okay, we're going to get a little hacky here.
